# Math for ~~noobs~~ Sim racer

- The guide assumes you have 16yo math knowledge (all 4 operations, fraction, basic equation stuff, exponent, trigonometry)
- You don't need to know how to solve anything, we just need to be able to read it and understand some of it.
- You can skip stuff, but it escalates quickly

**Why is math so challenging?**

- Because it describes reality, and reality is ~~a bitch~~ difficult
- There are multiple notations for the same thing
- Mathematicians/Engineers love Greek letters and rarely explain their meaning in the context (of course, the meaning changes with the context)

**A quick note on exponents**

As stated above, mathematicians love to use different notation for the same thing.

So, for something like speed, meter per second, $m/s$ (which is a derivative btw), it can be written in different way.
- $m/s$ (slash notation)
- $\frac{m}{s}$ (fractional notation)
- $m \cdot s^{ -1}$ (negative exponent notation)
- $m \cdot \frac{1}{s}$ (explicit multiplication by the reciprocal)
- $ms^{-1}$ (meh... not to be mistaken with $milliseconds^{-1}$)

Basically, "multiplying by s exponent -1" (aka: $s^{-1}$) is the same thing as multiplying by $\frac{1}{s}$ which is the same thing a dividing by s.
_The mo' you know_. 

$\to m \cdot s^{-1} = m \cdot \frac{1}{s} = m/s = \frac{m}{s}$


This $^{-1}$ is also called "_reciprocal_" or "_multiplicative inverse_".
So the reciprocal of s is $s^{-1}$ (or, same thing, $\frac{1}{s}$)

Anyway, let's get into it and establish some standards

## SI Units

For the calculation, unless explicitly & clearly stated otherwise, we'll use SI Unit exclusively.
As well as the derived units.

We'll also provide some conversion for reference, but it's just for display.
eg: $m/s \to km/h, kph, mph$

### Time

- The unit is second ($s$), the usual symbol for time is $t$ or $T$. (if we're really pedantic, it's just $t$, because $T$ is for the temperature)
- The delta time (time passed between two events) is $\Delta T$, or $\Delta t$, and expressed in $s$ (in our context it will most likely be in milliseconds, $ms$).
  - More on $\Delta$ later. But, TL;DR, a delta is basically a difference (a substraction).
- The reciprocal of time is the frequency ($s^{-1}$) expressed in hertz ($Hz$)

### Length

- The SI unit for length is "metre" or "meter" ($m$), not miles, furlong, banana, you-name-it.
- The reciprocal of length is a weird unit we don't care about.
- The derivative of length (or distance, same thing) is speed, or velocity, expressed in $m/s$
  - More on derivative later.
  - The second derivative, or second-order derivative, or the derivative of the derivative is _acceleration_: $m/s^2$. 
    - It is often expressed as a multiple of $g$, where $g$ is the standard gravity constant ($g \approx 9.81m/s^2$)
  - By the way, the 3rd-order derivative is called "jerk" ($j$) and is in $m/s^3$. In english it is "the rate of change of acceleration" (we could write it $g/s$ but we don't)
  - Just for fun:
    - 4th order is "Snap" or "Jounce"
    - 5th is "Crackle"
    - 6th is "Pop" (Thank you wikipedia)

### Mass

- Kilogram ($kg$) is used for mass ($m$), which is equal to 1000 grams ($g$)
- Not to be mistaken with weight, expressed in Newton ($N$), which is the unit of Force.
  - Yes, weight is a force. The force generated by the gravitational attraction on a mass.
- There is no reciprocal of mass. And even is there were, we don't need it.

### Angle and rotation

- We're most likely to use radians ($rad$) as a unit for "angle" (to be pendantic, it's "plane angle") but degree centigrade (°) is very common as well
- 1 circle is $2\pi rad$ = 360°
- Some weirdo use $\tau$ (tau): $1\tau = 2\pi rad = 360°$. It does make sense, but we'll stick to SI.
  - If you see $\tau$ on this project, it's unlikely to mean $2\pi$ 
- The unit for "solid angle" (3d geometry) is steradian ($sr$) and I hope we won't need it.
- The derivative, in radian per second ($rad/s$), is called "Angular velocity"
  - Of course we have 2nd derivative: Angular acceleration, in $rad/s^2$
  - And hopefully there is no angular jerk, angular jounce, etc... But now we know. If it exists, we'll know how to deal with it.
- We'll mostly end up using $rpm$ btw.
  - $rpm$ or "rotation per minute" is an "angular velocity".

### Temperature

- The Kelvin ($K$) is the SI. But we're most likely to use °C.
- The good news is that $\Delta 1K = \Delta 1°C$
  - The size of one kelvin is identical to the size of one degree Celsius."
    - This means a temperature change (a delta ($\Delta$)) is the same on both scales

### Force

- Force, in Newton ($N$) is a derived unit.
- It is, hold your beer: $kg \cdot m \cdot s^{-2}$, or $kg \cdot m/s^2$

## Derivatives (aka: Rate of Change)

**SUPER IMPORTANT STUFF**: This whole project is about car dynamics. **dy-na-mics** ! aka: "by how much stuff change".

Derivative is all about "how much stuff change".

We already got into derivate, and you may have "_some intution about it_" already.

You already saw this with speed ($m/s$) and acceleration ($m/s^2$). 
A derivative is just a fancy word for an **rate of change**.

A derivative is often seen as "how much something change **over time**". It's not always over time, it could be anything.
But using time is not only common, it's also easier to understand.

$m/s$ is "how much the distance (in $m$) change over time (in $s$).

### From "English" to "Fancy Math"

- well use $t$ for time, $d$ for distance.
- "at time $0s$ we are at distance $0m$". (English)
  - Subscript notation:
    - $t_0 = 0s$
    - $d_0 = 0m$
  - Function notation: $d(0s) = 0m$ 
- "at $10s$ we are at $100m$":
  - $t_1 = 10s$
  - $d_1 = 100m$
  - $d(10s) = 100m$

- how much time passed between $t_0$ and $t_1$ ?
  - 10 - 0 = 10. right ?
  - Let's use our subscript notation for fancy mathematicians
    - $t_1 - t_0 = 10s - 0s = 10s$
  - So the "change in time", "the interval of time", or "the difference of time between now ($t_1$) and then ($t_0$) is" : $10s$
  - This "change in time", "interval", or "difference in time between now and then" have a fancy notation: $\Delta t$ (delta t)
  - Therefore: $\Delta t = t_1 - t_0 = 10s - 0s = 10s$. 
    - $\Delta t = 10s$
  
- Same for the distance. It's the same thing so i'll keep it short
  - $d_0 = 0m$
  - $d_1 = 100m$
  - $\Delta d = d_1 - d_0 = 100 - 0 = 100m$
  - $\Delta d = 100m$
  
We still haven't got into derivate but it turns out we did the hard work already.
Because, hopefully, you now undertstand $\Delta$.

#### Derivative (don't panic)

- $\Delta$ really is a shortened way to express a difference, a change, an interval, a substraction of two of the same thing, you-name-it. you get the idea.
- $\Delta d$ = a change ($\Delta$) in distance ($d$)
- $\Delta t$ = a change ($\Delta$) in time ($t$) (an interval)

Let's go back to $m/s$, which is a speed (or velocity), which is a derivative of distance (or length) over time.
You know where this is going ? yes ? hopefully ? I sure hope so : A change in distance ($\Delta d$) over an interval of time ($\Delta t$) 

- For our $m/s$ We got our meters, $m$, for the distance. And seconds, $s$, for time. 
- $\Delta t$ (10s) and $\Delta d$ (100m).
- What left is to rewrite it a little bit:
  - speed $\to m/s \to \frac{m}{s}$ (same thing but in fractional notation instead of slash notation)
  - $100m$ / $10s$ right ? "100m per 10s" ? That's not how we expressed speed. We express it in "meter per (1) second"

##### There it is ! Finally !

"The rate of change of meter per second" $\to \frac{\Delta d}{\Delta t} = \frac{100m}{10s} = \frac{10m}{1s} = 10 \cdot \frac{m}{s} = 10 m/s$

$\frac{\Delta d}{\Delta t}$ is one of many notation to express a derivative. 

"_Wait this is wrong !_" say the mathematician.
"_Yes, it is, annoyingly so. But i don't care_" the narrator reply.

- **Technically**: we got the _average speed_ over $10s$ : "_The average rate of change (of distance) over an interval (of time)_"
- And **Technically**: a derivative is for "the instantaneous rate of change"
  - aka: "over an infinitely small $\Delta$"
  - a "small $\Delta$" is express as $d$ or $\delta$ (lower case delta)

But, you know what ? Screw it ! I don't want to deal with that.

Just so you know, **Technically**:
- the instantaneous speed (the "correct" derivative) is then: $\frac{\delta d}{\delta t}$
- the second derivative $(m/s^2)$is: $\frac{\delta^2 d}{\delta t^2}$
- third: $(m/s^3)$ $\to \frac{\delta^3 d}{\delta t^3}$

And there is a bunch of different notation:

| Mathematician | Notation | First Derivative | Second Derivative | Best Use Case |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| **Lagrange** | Prime Notation | $f'(x)$ | $f''(x)$ | General calculus |
| **Leibniz** | Fraction Notation | $\frac{dy}{dx}$ | $\frac{d^2y}{dx^2}$ | Physics, Chain Rule, Multivariable Calculus |
| **Newton** | Dot Notation | $\dot{y}$ | $\ddot{y}$ | Physics (derivatives with respect to time) |
| **Euler** | Operator Notation | $D_x f$ | $D_x^2 f$ | Differential Equations |

(Thank you gemini for the Markdown)

You will never, ~~ever~~, see Euler notation here. (Unless I "copy/pasted stuff for reference" and couldn't find it with a human readable notation.)

### Derivatives of Derivatives (The "Higher-Order" Stuff)

Let's calm down a little bit. The hard stuff is behind us.

Speed as we now know in a fancy way is the derivative of distance over time.

- It's expressed in $m/s$
- or $\frac{m}{s}$
- or $\frac{\Delta d}{\Delta t}$ (average speed)
- or $\frac{\delta d}{\delta t}$ (instantaneous speed, Leibniz notation)
- or $\dot{d}$ (also instantaneous speed but for by Newton)
- or $f'(d)$ (Lagrange)

Acceleration is "the derivative speed". Speed being a derivative itself, acceleration is a "derivative of a derivative", or "second derivative" or "second-order derivative".

aka: "Acceleration expresses how much speed change over time".

We're talking about "meter per second per second" (this is not a typo).
Hence the $m/s^2$ (meter per second squared)

And so on... how much acceleration change over time ? meter per second per second per second"
- $m/s^3$, or "jerk" ($j$)
- This is the stuff that really hurt. Speed don't kill. it's a large change in acceleration (more often that not a deceleration from "a lot" to 0) that will kill you. Jerk kills.

### Last word about derivative

- I did some gross generalization (introducing average speed as a derivative when derivative is all about an infinitely small $\Delta$)
- I only talked about distance over time. But it can be anything over anything.
- You should now have an intution about all other derivative (radial velocity ($rad/s$, force ($kg \cdot m/s^2$), Spring rate ($mm/N$))

### Force (again)

The units, like Force, with annoying negative exponant can be simplified:
- Mutiplying by $s^{-2}$ is just an annoying way to divide by $s^2$. And it is MUCH easier to understand as a regular human.

So for Force, as seen previously:
- The SI notation is : $kg \cdot m \cdot s^{-2}$
- Rewritten with a positive exponant to $kg \cdot m/s^2$
- And it turns out that $m/s^2$ is acceleration ($a$) and kg is a mass ($m$)
- $F=ma$, just the way I like it.

### Integral

- "Nooooo ! I don't want to hear about it ! I don't like it ! I hate it ! No way !" you say.
- "Yes way" I tell you.

The integral is the **opposite of the derivative**.

Therefore:
- The derivative of speed ($m/s$) is acceleration ($m/s^2$)
- The integral of acceleration ($m/s^2$) is speed ($m/s$)
- The notation SUCK!

This is how we write "Speed (v) is the integral of acceleration (a):"

$$v(t) = \int a(t) dt$$

(That stupid curly 'S' is the integral sign, and the `dt` just means "with respect to time". Don't worry about it.)

That's it for integral. Bye.



